The Project Gutenberg EBook of Trout Flies of Devon and Cornwall, and How
and When to Use Them, by G. W. Soltau

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Trout Flies of Devon and Cornwall, and How and When to Use Them

Author: G. W. Soltau

Release Date: January 11, 2019 [EBook #58674]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TROUT FLIES OF DEVON AND CORNWALL ***




Produced by F E H and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)









Transcriber’s Notes

  All punctuation errors repaired.
  Page 12--ancle is an obsolete spelling of ankle, so has been retained.
  The corrections listed in the Errata have been applied to the text.
  These are noted at the end of the book.


[Illustration]




  TROUT FLIES
  OF
  DEVON AND CORNWALL,
  AND
  WHEN AND HOW TO USE THEM.

  BY G. W. SOLTAU, ESQ.
  LITTLE EFFORD, DEVON.

  “And thus our life exempt from public haunts,
  “Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brook,
  “Sermons in stones, and good in every thing.”


  LONGMAN & CO. PATERNOSTER ROW;
  WALLIS AND HOLDEN, EXETER; BRIGHTWELL, BARNSTAPLE; LIDDELL,
  BODMIN; HEARD AND SONS, TRURO; AND
  EDWARD NETTLETON, WHIMPLE STREET,
  PLYMOUTH,
  PRINTER TO HER MAJESTY.

  1847.




_NOTE._

_It will be remarked that the Flies furnished by the makers, do not,
in all cases, exhibit the same tints as those shown in the drawings;
this arises from the difficulty of colouring exactly from the original
Flies. I have examined the patterns manufactured by the parties
referred to in p. 40, and find they correspond precisely with my own. I
would therefore recommend those persons, who are in the habit of making
their own flies, to procure patterns from the makers and imitate them,
rather than take those in the lithographed sketch for their guide._


ERRATA.

Page 9, line 16, for _to_ apt, read _too_ apt.
Page 15, line 7, for _variest_, read _veriest_.
Page 20, line 10, for _aught_, read _naught_.
Page 35, line 8, for _lace_, read _Laced_.
Page 99, line 8, for _falshood_, read _falsehood_.




TREATISE

ON

FLY-FISHING.


I am induced to offer the following pages to the youthful aspirant
after piscatory fame, from the belief, that the various treatises,
which have appeared from time to time on Fly-Fishing, do not contain
those minute details, which are so essential to the ready acquirement
of the art, and which are generally learnt by slow degrees; either
from some experienced angler, or by the accidental discovery of the
noviciate.

My chief object however, is to furnish the sportsman, who for the first
time is about to wet his line in the west, with a list of flies; which,
for a period of twenty years, I have found the most effective, in the
Rivers of Devon and Cornwall. I have no doubt, they would be equally
successful in Somerset, in the smaller Rivers of Wales, and in some of
the Irish Lakes; but, as I cannot vouch from personal experience, I
must leave to others the task of testing their more general application.

My remarks are restricted to Fly-Fishing; partly, because I hold this
to be the most skilful and pleasing of the various ways by which man
secures the wily fish; and also, from the length to which this paper
would extend, if I were to enlarge on the numerous other devices
adopted to entrap the finny tribe.

Worms, kill-devils, salmon-roe, minnows, cock-chafers, &c. &c. &c., are
to be met with in the catalogue of the fisherman’s stock in trade; and,
if we extend our researches to distant climes, we find even birds are
classed among the fishing implements.

The Cormorant, an aquatic bird of China, and other countries, is an
excellent swimmer and diver, and also flies well. It is very voracious,
and as soon as it perceives a fish in the water, it darts down with
great rapidity, and clings its prey firmly, by means of saw like
indentations on its feet. The fish is brought up with one foot; the
other foot enables the bird to rise to the surface, and by an adroit
movement, the fish is loosened from the foot and grasped in the bird’s
mouth.

Le Comte, a French writer, describes the mode in which the Chinese
avail themselves of this angling propensity on the part of the
cormorants: “to this end,” says he, “cormorants are educated as men
rear up spaniels or hawks, and one man can easily manage one hundred.
The fisher carries them out into the lake, perched on the gunnel of
his boat, where they continue tranquil and expecting his orders with
patience. When arrived at the proper place, at the first signal given,
each flies a different way to fulfil the task assigned it. It is very
pleasant on this occasion, to behold with what sagacity they portion
out the lake or the canal where they are upon duty. They hunt about,
they plunge, they rise a hundred times to the surface, until they have
at last found their prey. They then seize it with their beak by the
middle, and carry it without fail to their master. When the fish is
too large, they then give each other mutual assistance; one seizes it
by the head, the other by the tail, and in this manner carry it to the
boat together. There, the boatman stretches out one of his long oars,
on which they perch, and being delivered of their burden they then fly
off to pursue their sport. When they are wearied he lets them rest
for a while: but they are never fed till their work is over. In this
manner they supply a very plentiful table--but still their natural
gluttony cannot be reclaimed even by education. They have always, when
they fish, a string fastened round their throats, to prevent them
from devouring their prey, as otherwise they would at once satiate
themselves and discontinue the pursuit the moment they had filled their
bellies.”

Local information, is at all times, most valuable to the fisherman;
without it, his money is often wasted, and his patience, sorely taxed.
He purchases flies, which frighten, rather than attract, the fish. A
sportsman should seek instruction from every quarter, and not take for
granted that the experience he has acquired in his own neighbourhood,
will serve him when he roams from home. But many are too apt to rely on
their own judgment; they procure flies, which are totally inapplicable
to our rivers; they sally forth on a piscatory trip well provided with
these monsters; they have little or no sport; are disgusted with our
rivers; and seek in some distant land that amusement, which under
more favorable auspices, they might have obtained in these counties.
Not that our fish generally run so large, as in some parts of the
kingdom--they are however very strong, and one of a half pound, will
afford better sport, than one of double the weight in some of the more
popular streams.

Let not the reader flatter himself, that the closest attention to
the suggestions I shall shortly offer; nay, that all the information
contained in the numerous books, which have been written upon this
interesting subject; will, at once, enable him to supply the larder or
gratify a friend; they are _only_ facilities to the acquirement of the
science; practice and patience, are required in large proportion to
form the expert fisherman. The days, the weeks, which he must devote to
the attainment of his wishes, will not however be unprofitably passed,
if he avail himself of the numerous opportunities which will offer
for the study of those works of nature, with which his path will be
abundantly strewed. He will find opportunities for acquiring an insight
into the natural history of the finny tribe; into the natural history
of the busy fly, or beauteous moth, that tempt the wily fish. The
lichen and the moss--the thousand plants that line the rivers bank, or
the stately trees and shapeless rocks that shade its waters; all, are
subjects, which the more he contemplates, the more he will wonder and
admire. And, when by practice, he finds himself an adept in the art,
and looks with pleasure on his captured prey; it may suggest the fate
of those, who attracted by the glittering tinsel and allured by the
gaudy show, follow these dangerous snares and fall a sacrifice to the
pomps and vanities of life.

The expert fisherman must be temperate in all things: the steady hand
and quick eye are indispensable; the drunkard must quit our ranks,--the
feverish temperament,--the blood-shot eye,--the giddy head, bespeak the
peril of the man--not of the fish. The epicure must follow his boon
companion;--the bloated cheek--the shortened breath--the gouty ancle,
are more likely to furnish food for fish, than fish, for food. That
temperance has characterised many of our best artists, is evidenced,
from the extreme age that several have acquired; for it cannot have
been from mere accident, or from their having originally stronger
stamina than other mortals, that so many have lived to an age far
exceeding the ordinary term of human existence.

Henry Jenkins, who lived to the age of 169, and who boasted when giving
evidence in a court of justice, to a fact of one hundred and twenty
years date, that he could dub a fly as well as any man in Yorkshire,
continued angling for more than a century, after the greater number of
those who were born at the same time, were mouldering in their graves.

Dr. Nowell was a most indefatigable angler, allotting a tenth part of
his time to his favorite recreation, and giving a tenth part of his
income and all the fish he caught to the poor. He lived to the age of
95, having neither his eyesight, hearing, or memory impaired.

Walton, lived to upwards of 90.

Henry Mackenzie, died in January, 1831, aged 86.

These and many others that might be named, were remarkable for their
temperate habits: there is no doubt however, that their pursuits
by the side of the running streams, whose motion imparts increased
activity to the vital principle of the air; and, that composure of mind
(so necessary to the perfect health of the body), to which angling
so materially contributes, must also have had an influence on their
physical constitutions.

We boast in our ranks, some of England’s bravest warriors, her
most experienced statesmen, her best divines, and her cleverest
philosophers. Our princes have substituted the rod for the sceptre,
and have endeavoured to vie with their subjects in the capture of the
wily trout.

George the Fourth, was much attached to this amusement, though he was
not particularly successful. His fishing apparatus was of the most
costly character: the case, containing the various requisites, was
covered with the best crimson morocco leather; the edges, sloped with
double borders of gold ornaments, representing alternately, salmon,
and basket; the outer border, formed a rich gold wreath of the rose,
thistle, and shamrock, intertwined by oak leaves, and acorns; the
centre of the lid, presented a splendid gold impression of the Royal
Arms of Great Britain and Ireland. The case was fastened with one of
Bramah’s patent locks, handles, eyes, &c., all double gilt; whilst the
interior was lined with the finest Genoese sky-blue velvet. The hooks
for angling and fly-fishing were of the most chaste and beautiful
description.

That majesty is not famed for proficiency in the art, may be partly
accounted for from the circumstance, that fly-fishing is one of the
few occupations which depend _entirely_ on the individual skill of the
sportsman. Keepers may rise pheasants by the score, and drive hares by
the dozen before the well-placed gun; offering shots which the veriest
tyro cannot fail to kill: the huntsman by a judicious cast, may exhibit
the hounds and their quarry, in the most accommodating proximity to
the royal group--the highland deer may be driven within the limits of
the rifles range--but, no keeper’s art can oblige a trout to rise; or,
compel the salmon to quit its darkened haunt, even for the amusement of
princes, or sport of kings. The finny tribe acknowledge no allegiance,
and will not be tempted, though the fly be proffered by royal hands.
Prompt obedience is expected by kings; a ready compliance with their
wishes, is their behest.

Nelson, was an excellent fly-fisher; and, as a proof of his passion for
it, continued the pursuit even with his left hand.

Dr. Paley, was ardently attached to this amusement, so much so, that
when the Bishop of Durham enquired of him, when one of his most
important works would be finished; he said, with great simplicity and
good humour, “My Lord, I shall work steadily at it when the fly-fishing
season is over;” as if this were a business of his life.

To the list of eminent characters who have been lovers of angling, may
be added the name of Robert Burns.

Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd, may be noticed as an expert angler.

Professor Wilson, is one of the best fly-fishers that ever threw a fly.

Wordsworth, is an angler, and in many of his poems may be traced images
which have reference to, or have been suggested by this delightful art.

Emerson, the mathematician, was a fly-fisher.

Dr. Birch, formerly Secretary to the Royal Society, was a lover of
angling; and Dr. Wollaston and Sir Humphrey Davy, are instances of men
of the highest philosophic attainments, finding pleasure in the rod and
line.

Chantrey, was much attached to this amusement, and prided himself on
the superiority of his equipment.

A sport which is thus seen to be so universally popular, has naturally
been selected as a subject upon which some of our ablest men have
written many instructive and interesting pages. The first treatise in
our language appeared in 1496 but the _earliest_ allusion to the art,
is by Elian, who flourished in the year 225. In the fifteenth book
of his History of Animals, he says, “that a fish of various color is
taken in the River Austræum, between Beræa and Thessalonica.” He also
describes a fly which frequents the river, which is greatly preyed
on by this fish; he states, that the skilful fisherman, dresses an
imitation of it on his hook, forming the body of purple coloured wool,
and adding two yellow feathers of a cock’s hackle for wings.

The work which appeared in 1496, was printed by Wynkyn de Worde, and
is known by the name of the “Book of St. Albans,” from its having been
first printed in the monastery there in 1486. This book is a small
folio of seventy-three leaves, and contains short treatises on hawking,
hunting, fishing, &c. How long the latter art had been practiced in
England before this publication, is not known; but the directions
for dressing the twelve different kind of flies, (which even Walton,
writing a hundred and fifty years later, availed himself of) are not
such, as were likely to be suggested in the infancy of the art.

The treatise commences with the following expositions:--

“Solomon in his parables saith, ‘that a good spirit maketh a
flourishing age;’ that is, a fair age and a long.” “If a man lack leech
and medicine, he shall make three things, his leech and medicine,
and he shall need never no more. The first of them is, a merry
thought,--the second is, labour not outrageous,--the third is, diet
measurable.”

The writer then proceeds to a comparison of angling, with hunting,
hawking, and fowling, and after enumerating the inconveniences
attendant on the three last, thus recounts the pleasures and advantages
of angling.

“Thus me seemeth, that hunting and hawking, and also fowling, are so
laborious and grievous, that none of them may perform, nor be the means
to induce a man to a merry spirit; which is the cause of his long life,
according unto the said parable of Solomon.

“Doubtless then it followeth that it needs must be the desport of
fishing with an angle, for all other manner of fishing is laborious and
grievous, often making folks full wet and cold, which many times hath
been cause of great infirmities.

“But the angler may have no cold, nor no disease, nor anger, except he
be the cause himself. For he may not lose at the most, but a line and
a hook, of which he may have store plenty of his own making, as this
simple treatise shall teach him. So then his loss is _not_ grievous,
and other griefs may he not have, saving if any fish break away, after
that he is taken on the hook, or else that he catch nought. _Which_ is
_not_ grievous. For if he fail of one, he may not fail of another, if
he doeth as this treatise teacheth; except there be naught in the water.

“And yet, at _least_ he has his wholesome walk and merry at his ease,
and hath a sweet air of the sweet savour of the mead flowers that
maketh him hungry. He heareth the melodious harmony of fowls. He seeth
the young swans, herons, ducks, coots, and many other fowls with their
broods: which seemeth to me, better than all the noise of hounds, the
blast of horns, and the cry that hunters, falconers, and fowlers, can
make.

“And if the angler take fish, surely then, there is no man merrier than
he is in his spirit.

“Also, whoso will use the game of angling, he must rise early; which
thing is profitable to man in this wise, (that is to wit) most to the
health of his soul, for it shall cause him to be holy. And to the
health of his body, for it shall cause him to be whole. Also to the
increase of his goods, for it shall make him rich, as the old English
proverb says, in this wise, ‘whoso will rise early, shall be holy,
healthy, and wealthy.’

“Thus, have I proved in my intent, that the sport of angling is the
very means and cause that induceth a man unto a merry spirit. Which
after the said parable of Solomon, and the said doctrine of physic,
maketh a flowering age and a long.

“And therefore to all you that be virtuous, genteel, and free born, I
write and make this simple treatise following, by which ye may have the
full craft of angling to desport you at your pleasure, to the intent
that your age may be the more flower and the more longer to endure.”

From the first publication of this book to the appearance of “Walton’s
Complete Angler,” there seems to have been no improvement of the
original work; on the contrary, the “doers” of new editions of the
book under new titles seem to have had but little skill in the art
of fly-fishing, and their alterations, as Pinkerton said of Evelyn’s
amendments of his work on medals, “are for the worse.”

In 1653, appeared the first edition of “Walton’s Complete Angler; or,
Contemplative Man’s Recreation:” in small duodecimo, adorned with
cuts of most of the fish mentioned in it. It came into the world
attended with laudatory verses by several writers of the day, and had
in the title page, (though Walton thought proper to omit it in future
editions) this apposite motto, “Simon Peter said, I go a fishing, and
they said, we also will go with thee.” John xxi. 3.

Isaac Walton, was born at Stafford, in August, 1593. He settled in
London as a shopkeeper, in the Royal Exchange; and, as in the year
1624, he was fixed in a different part of the city, it is supposed,
he was one of the first inhabitants of that building; and being then
but twenty-three years, was perhaps one of those industrious young
men whom, as we are told, the munificent founder himself, Sir Thomas
Gresham, placed in the shops erected over that edifice. We next hear of
him in Chancery Lane, where he carried on the trade of a linen draper.
About 1643, he left London with a fortune, very far short of what
would _now_ be called a competency; we are told he subsequently “lived
at Stafford and elsewhere, but mostly in the families of the eminent
clergymen of England, of whom he was much beloved.” He employed his
time in writing several biographical works, and at the advanced age
of eighty-three, (which, to use his own words) “might have procured
him a writ of ease, and secured him from all further trouble in that
kind,” he undertook to write the life of Dr. Robert Sanderson, Bishop
of Lincoln, which was published in 1677. In 1683, when he was ninety
years old, he published “Thealma and Clearchus,” a pastoral history, in
smooth and easy verse. He lived but a short time after the publication
of this poem; for, as Wood says, “he ended his days on the fifteenth
day of December, 1683,--in the great frost at Winchester, at the house
of Dr. William Hawkins, a prebendary of the church there, where he lies
buried.”

The “Complete Angler” has passed through several editions; and,
although the art has greatly improved since Walton’s day, its perusal
will afford much information and amusement, as well to the sportsman
as the general reader; for, in the words of one of the editors, “let
no man imagine, that a work on such a subject, must necessarily be
unentertaining, or trifling, or even uninstructive; for the contrary
will most evidently appear, from a perusal of this excellent piece,
which, whether we consider the elegant simplicity of the style; the
ease, and unaffected humour of the dialogue; the lovely scenes which
it delineates; the enchanting pastoral poetry which it contains; or,
the fine morality it so sweetly inculcates; has hardly its fellow in
any of the modern languages.”

These remarks are very applicable to other treatises which have
appeared on the same subject, more especially those of Shaw, Scrope,
and Sir H. Davie; indeed, there are few works more beautifully written
than “Salmonia,” wherein the talented author thus alludes to his
favorite recreation.

“The search after food, is an instinct belonging to our nature; and
from the savage in his rudest and most primitive state, who destroys
a piece of game, or a fish, with a club or spear--to man in the most
cultivated state of society, who employs artifice, machinery, and the
resources of various other animals to secure his object, the _origin_
of the pleasure is similar, and its object the same; but that kind of
it requiring most art, may be said to characterise man in his highest
or intellectual state; and the fisher for salmon or trout with the
fly, employs not only machinery to assist his physical powers, but
applies sagacity to conquer difficulties; and the pleasure derived
from ingenious resources and devices, as well as from active pursuit,
belongs to this amusement. _Then_ as to his philosophical tendency;
it is a pursuit of moral discipline--requiring patience, forbearance
and command of temper. As connected with natural science, it may be
vaunted as demanding a knowledge of the habits of a considerable
tribe of created beings--fishes, and the animals that they prey upon;
and an acquaintance with the signs and tokens of the weather and its
changes, the nature of waters and of the atmosphere. As to its poetical
relations, it carries us into the most wild and beautiful scenery of
nature; amongst the mountain lakes, and the clear and lovely streams
that gush from the higher ranges of elevated hills--or that make their
way through the cavities of calcareous strata.

“How delightful in the early spring, after the dull and tedious time of
winter, when the frosts disappear, and the sunshine warms the earth and
waters, to wander forth by some clear stream, to see the leaf bursting
from the purple bud, or scent the odours of the bank perfumed by the
violet, and enamelled, as it were, with the primrose and the daisy;--to
wander upon the fresh turf below the shade of trees, whose bright
blossoms are filled with the music of the bee,--and on the surface of
the waters to view the gaudy flies sparkling like animated gems in the
sunbeams, whilst the bright and beautiful trout is watching them from
below;--to hear the twittering of the water-birds, who, alarmed at your
approach, rapidly hide themselves beneath the flowers and leaves of
the water-lily;--and as the season advances, to find all these objects
changed for others of the same kind, but better and brighter, till the
swallow and the trout contend as it were for the gaudy May fly, and
till, in pursuing your amusement in the calm and balmy evening, you
are serenaded by the songs of the cheerful thrush and the melodious
nightingale, performing the offices of maternal love, in thickets
ornamented with the rose and the woodbine.”

Sir H. Davie’s researches in natural history, are exhibited in many
parts of this interesting work, and his suggestions with reference
to the migration of animals, will account for those phenomena, which
direct the operations of the sportsman whether armed with gun or rod.
He is of opinion that the two great causes of the change of place of
animals is the providing of food for themselves and resting places and
food for their young. The great supposed migrations of herrings from
the poles to the temperate zone, he considers to be only the approach
of successive shoals from deep to shallow water, for the purpose of
spawning.

The migrations of salmon and trout are evidently for the purpose of
depositing their ova--or of finding food after they have spawned.

Swallows and bee-eaters, decidedly pursue flies half the globe over;
the snipe tribe in like manner, search for worms and larvæ--flying
from those countries where either frost or dryness prevents them from
boring--making generally small flights at a time, and resting on their
travels where they find food. A journey from England to Africa is no
more for an animal that can fly with the wind one hundred miles in an
hour, than a journey for a Londoner to his seat in a distant province.

The migration of smaller fishes or birds always occasions the migration
of larger ones, that prey on them:--thus, the seal follows the salmon
in summer, to the mouths of rivers--the hake follows the herring
and pilchard--hawks are seen in great quantities in the month of
May, coming into the east of Europe after quails and landrails--and
locusts are followed by numerous birds, that fortunately for the
agriculturists, make them their prey.

The reason of the migration of sea-gulls to the land is their security
of finding food. They may be observed, at this time, feeding greedily
on the earth worms and larvæ, driven out of the ground by severe
floods, and the fish, on which they prey in fine weather in the sea,
leave the surface when storms prevail, and go deeper.

The different tribes of the wading birds always migrate, when rain is
about to take place. The vulture, upon the same principle, follows
armies, and there is little doubt, that the augury of the ancients was
a good deal founded upon the observation of the instinct of birds.
There are many superstitions of the vulgar, owing to the same cause.

For anglers, in spring, it is always unlucky to see single magpies, but
two may be always regarded as a favorable omen; and the reason is, that
in cold and stormy weather one magpie alone leaves the nest in search
of food, the other remaining sitting upon the eggs or the young ones;
but when two go out together, the weather is warm and mild, and thus
favorable to fishing.

I shall dismiss Sir H. Davie for the present, with the following
remarks which he offers on the whale, as they may be interesting to
those who have remarked the comparatively easy capture of an animal,
possessed of such enormous strength and activity.

The whale, having no air-bladder, can sink to the lowest depths of the
ocean; and mistaking the harpoon for the teeth of the sword fish or a
shark, he instantly descends, this being his manner of freeing himself
from these enemies, who cannot bear the pressure of a deep ocean: and
from ascending and descending, in a small space, he puts himself in the
power of the whaler; whereas, if he knew his force, and were to swim on
the surface in a straight line, he would break or destroy the machinery
by which he is arrested, as easily as a salmon breaks the single gut
of a fisher, whose reel is entangled.

Mr. Scrope’s work entitled “Days and Nights of Salmon fishing,” is most
interesting; his description of this enticing sport is so vivid, and
given with such spirit, that even those who never saw a rod, except
that in Oxford-street with a golden perch hanging from its point and
for ever turning on its axis; or whose knowledge of fish is confined
to the unfortunate inmates of a glass globe, are led to take a lively
interest in his various piscatory adventures, and cease to wonder that
some of the wisest and best of men have been enthusiastic admirers of
the art. His apology for fly fishing is ingenious, and may be quoted
when the angler is rallied by his tender-hearted neighbour.

“I take a little wool and feather, and tying it in a particular manner
on a hook, make an imitation of a fly; then I throw it across the
river, and let it sweep round the stream with a lively motion. This
I have an undoubted right to do; for the river belongs to me or my
friend,--but mark what follows. Up starts a monster fish, with his
murderous jaws, and makes a dash at my little Andromeda. Thus _he_ is
the aggressor, not I; his intention is evidently to commit murder. He
is caught in the act of putting that intention into execution. Having
wantonly intruded himself on my hook, which I contend he had no right
to do, he darts about in various directions, evidently surprised to
find that the fly, which he hoped to make an easy conquest of, is
much stronger than himself. I naturally attempt to regain this fly,
unjustly withheld from me. The fish gets tired and weak, in his lawless
attempts to deprive me of it. I take advantage of his weakness, I
own, and drag him, somewhat loth, to the shore; where one rap at the
back of the head ends him in an instant. If he is a trout, I find his
stomach distended with flies. That beautiful one called the May fly,
who is by nature almost ephemeral--who rises up from the bottom of
the shallows, spreads its light wings, and flits in the sunbeam, in
enjoyment of its new existence--no sooner descends to the surface of
the water to deposit its eggs, than the unfeeling fish, at one fell
spring, numbers him prematurely with the dead. You see, then, what a
wretch a fish is; no ogre is more blood thirsty, for he will devour his
nephews, nieces, and even his own children, when he can catch them, and
I take some credit for having shown him up. What a bitter fright must
the smaller fry live in! They crowd to the shallows, lie hid among the
weeds, and dare not say the river is their own, I relieve them of their
apprehensions, and thus become popular with the small shoals.”

I must now hasten to offer those suggestions which I deem so requisite
for the attainment of that popularity to which Mr. SCROPE alludes;
and although I may in some respects appear tedious, I beg to assure
the novice that a good day’s fishing is often lost for lack of some
trifling appendage, and many a leviathan has escaped from the neglect
of some simple rule.

The dress of a fisherman should be as sombre as possible--a darkish
grey or lightish brown is probably the best, as these colours
assimilate with that of the bark of trees, and the mosses and lichens
which encrust the rocks. Shining metal buttons must be avoided. Laced
boots or shoes and stout leather gaiters are needed, as vipers resort
to the rivers in warm weather, and their teeth readily penetrate the
unprotected stocking. By the bye, if the sportsman should unfortunately
be bitten, a little carbonate of soda, or sweet oil should be applied
to the part as speedily as possible. I have found the former most
efficacious when my dogs have been bitten by those reptiles. Our moors
abound with them in August and September; it is well therefore to be
provided with a bottle of these simple antidotes, if a lengthened
excursion is contemplated by the angler or shot. A drab hat is
preferable to black, especially in hot weather, when the latter will
be found to heat the head considerably more than the former. Worsted
socks are less apt to chafe the feet than cotton, and a small portion
of yellow soap rubbed on the instep and heel will keep the feet in good
order during the longest day’s fag.

The next question is, what is the fitting time for adopting this
costume? Fishing may be pursued from the first week in March until the
last week in October. During the months of March, April, September, and
October, from ten to three or four, will be found the most profitable
hours; during the intervening months it is necessary, to ensure sport,
to be early on the banks--from six to eleven, and from three till dusk,
are generally the best hours. Before starting, be careful that your
tackle is complete and in good order. The rod, the fly-book, the reel,
the basket, must be examined, that nothing be left behind. It is justly
considered one of the greatest miseries of life to find oneself, after
a long ride or walk, minus either the above articles. These necessary
appendages should be of the best quality, to ensure which, purchase
them from a maker of known celebrity. In the first place, procure a
twelve-foot rod, which has a uniform even play; avoid a cheap, second
rate article, nine times out of ten it will be found to warp, crack, or
snap off; or if it escapes these calamities, the ferrels will become
loose, or the rings through which the line passes will check or chafe
it at every throw. Let your reel and line be of the best workmanship,
the size of the former and length of the latter the maker will inform
you; the twelve-foot rod indicates a narrow river, requiring the other
articles in proportion. The casting lines should be seven or even eight
feet long, made of round gut, small by degrees, and beautifully less to
the end, where the stream-fly is attached. They must be stained light
blue, for clear; brown, for red or pale ale coloured water: our rivers
are frequently of this colour, occasioned by the rain percolating
through the bogs with which our moors abound. Never use more than
two flies, one at the end of the collar, called the “stream-fly,” the
other about three feet from it, called “the bob.” It may be as well
to observe that when our rivers present the beerish appearance above
described, and the day is fine, with occasional clouds, a good day’s
sport may generally be depended on. The wind however must be consulted
as well as the water--if the weathercock indicates any portion of East
wind, relinquish the rod, and seek some other occupation. Fish have a
peculiar aversion to cold wind, and will not be tempted to expose their
noses within some distance of the surface; the fly, therefore, though
thrown with skill and judgment, will sport on the water in profitless
gambols. A Southerly wind and a cloudy sky are as welcome to the
fisherman as the fox-hunter: indeed the wind in that quarter generally
promises well for all field sports. West, if the weather is settled,
is also good; but from W. by N. to N. by E. it becomes less and less
favorable.

The choice of flies is the next consideration: as a general rule, when
the day is bright, use a dark fly, when gloomy, a bright one. The
Devonshire and Cornish fish are particular in their food--preferring
simple, plain viands; hence I have often seen sportsmen unsuccessful
in their efforts to move our trout--they present them with food which
instinct tells them is not congenial; they rise probably, look at the
monster, and depart to rise no more.

Neither do our fish desire much change of diet: the flies enumerated on
the annexed leaves are sufficient for all their wants, and if thrown
with skill, will surely repay the labour.

Purchase a Russia leather fishing book for the reception of these
gay deceivers. I recommend this material, because the moths will not
intrude within its folds. Let the article be no larger than sufficient
to carry a small collection of flies, four casting lines, a penknife,
and scissors to repair damages, a skein of strong black silk, and
forget not a small piece of Indian rubber, with a piece of white tape
attached thereto; the former to pass your casting line over, twice or
thrice, which immediately straightens it, the latter enables you to
recover the former, if through carelessness it falls to the ground.

Immediately above the flies, when placed in their respective loops,
write their numbers and the period when they are to be used; this will
save you much trouble, and your friend also should he borrow the book.

Each fly is entitled to a distinct appellation, but it frequently
happens that the dun of Mr. A. differs materially from that of Mr. B.;
thus the sportsman is disappointed in his application--when the packet
arrives he scarcely recognises one of his old acquaintances. To avoid
this inconvenience, I have adopted figures, and have furnished Mr. W.
H. ALFRED, No. 54, Moorgate Street, and 41, Coleman Street; Messrs.
BEN. CHEVALIER and Co. Bell Yard, Temple Bar, London; and Mr. J. N.
HEARDER, 28, Buckwell Street, Plymouth; with full particulars. Those
persons have engaged to keep a good stock on hand, so by sending to
either of them for any No. required, no mistake can arise.




No. 1.

FEBRUARY, MARCH, and APRIL, at all times; after rain, at any time
throughout the season.


No. 2.

FEBRUARY, MARCH, and APRIL.


No. 3.

A good fly through the season, especially on windy days. Makes an
excellent bob.


No. 4.

Latter end of FEBRUARY, the entire of MARCH, and the early part of
APRIL.


No. 5.

From the second week in APRIL to the end of the season, particularly
under bushes, and on the moors.


No. 6.

For dark, gloomy, windy days, from the middle of MARCH to the end of
the season.


No. 7.

Good fly from the last week in APRIL to the first of _August_, in hot
days especially.


No. 8.

In hot weather, during the months of MAY, JUNE, and JULY, no fly will
equal it.


No. 9.

Excellent moor fly at all times. Makes a good bob, particularly on
chilly days.


No. 10.

After rain throughout the season. Take this for the stream fly, and No.
1, for the bob, where the waters are the colour of small beer.


No. 11.

Latter end of AUGUST, all SEPTEMBER, to the third week in OCTOBER.


No. 12.

Very good moor fly, especially in MARCH, APRIL, and AUGUST. Use this
for bob, and No. 5, for stream.


No. 13.

From the latter end of MAY to the last week in AUGUST. Later in the
season if the weather is warm.


No. 14.

In hot days, in MAY and JUNE, a most killing fly.


No. 15.

A very superior fly in JUNE and JULY, or hot sultry days. A good bob,
with No. 8, as stream.


No. 16.

In sultry weather, after rain in JUNE, JULY, and beginning of AUGUST.


No. 17.

From the second week in JUNE, to the second week in AUGUST, a very
certain killer in hot days.


No. 18.

A good fly from the second week in JULY to the end of the season. A
superior bob on the moors.

[Illustration]

A black fly with silver twist may occasionally be substituted for No.
13. They are sold at all tackle makers.

The white moth is sold at all tackle makers, and is a good fly on
moon-light nights in JUNE and JULY.

Although Eighteen sorts are enumerated, it is by no means necessary
that the _occasional_ fisherman should be provided with the full
complement.

It will generally be found that Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10, 13, 17, are
certain killers. The others, however, must be procured by the more
indefatigable sportsman; especially if he is undaunted by wind or
weather.

Every thing being now in readiness for a start, be careful to commence
fishing with the sun in your face, and if possible, keep it so during
the day. By adopting this precaution, the shadow of yourself and rod
will not be cast upon the water, and your presence consequently is
less likely to be observed by the fish than if a contrary position were
adopted. Let me urge the great importance of keeping out of sight of
your prey as much as possible. If the banks are high and open, crouch
down, and if needs be, creep on, as you would if a duck and mallard
were the object of your pursuit, until you find you can command the
pool in your prostrate position. If bushes intervene, of course you may
approach with boldness: less caution is also needed when the banks are
nearly even with the surface of the water.

As a general rule, I am in favour of fishing up the stream for trout;
the heads of the fish being always against the current, their eyes are
pointed in the same direction, looking for flies, &c., which may be
floating down on the surface; your approach therefore is not so readily
perceived, and your fly when taken is pulled against the jaw, and not
from it as is often the case when fishing down the stream. The casting
the fly well and lightly is a knack which can only be acquired by
experience. The spring of the rod should do the chief work, and not the
labour of your arms. To effect this, you should lay the stress as near
the hand as possible, and make the wood undulate from _that_ point,
which is done by keeping the elbow in advance, and doing something with
the wrist which is not very easy to explain. Thus, the exertion should
be chiefly from the elbow and wrist, and _not_ from the shoulders.

A little practice will enable you to determine the length of line
required to reach a given spot: until this knowledge is acquired,
rather throw too _short_ than too _long_ a line. In the latter case, it
will bag in the water and scare the fish, or if per chance one rises,
it will most probably escape, before you have power to strike.

The stream fly should fall lightly on the desired spot, and the line,
being just of sufficient length to allow of the exact point being
reached, the bob fly will rest on the surface of the water, and by
imparting to the rod a slight tremulous motion, from right to left, the
stream fly will appear to be struggling in the stream, whilst the bob
will occasionally bob up and down, (from which circumstance its name is
derived) exhibiting the movement of the natural fly, when it alights,
rises, and again alights.

After some experience, the eye will apprize you when the fish rises to
seize the hook; you are doubly prepared to strike, if your line is on
the stretch, in which case, you feel, as well as see your prey.

Striking, signifies a sudden jerk of the rod, at the _instant_ the fish
has taken the hook, and forms a very important feature in the art of
fishing. If the jerk is too violent, the hook will probably be torn
from its hold, or if it be too slight, the hook will not enter the jaw,
and the fish escapes. The happy medium must be aimed at, remembering
that our small fish require gentler treatment, than those of greater
weight, whose capacious mouths afford a firmer hold, and may be treated
with less ceremony.

[Illustration]

Commence by throwing the fly across the tail of the stickle, thus:--A.
is the fisherman, B. B. the banks of the river, C. the tail of the
stickle, D. its commencement. A. first throws his fly across to E. then
draws it with a kind of tremulous motion to F. then to G. and back to
H. A. then moves on, and takes up his position at J. casts over to K.
and across to L. tries again at M. and hooks a fish. If it is small,
as too many of our West Country fish happen to be, it may be raised
instanter, gently out of the water, and deposited in the basket. A.
then advances a few paces, and finishes the pool between M. and D.

If by good luck a large fish is hooked, don’t attempt to jerk him out
of the water, which frequently snaps the gut or tears the hook from its
hold; but to use a technical term, “play him,” that is, let him swim
about with your fly well embodied in his jaw, until he is sufficiently
exhausted to enable you to take him out, either by lifting him over
the bank, by taking the casting line in your hand, or by drawing him
upon the sand or gravel. Whilst the fish is engaged in endeavouring to
rid itself of the disagreeable customer in its mouth, be careful to
maintain a steady, uniform strain, upon the line; don’t jerk at one
time and slack at another. If the fish is unusually large, the butt
of your rod must be held forward, which throws the point back; and
thus the line presses against the entire length of the rod, and offers
greater opposition to the fish than if the top were kept down and the
butt up. The following hints, from the pen of an experienced fisherman,
are deserving special notice.

“If your fish misses the fly in making his offer, wait awhile before
you throw a second time, and if he rises at all, he will come more
greedily for this delay. When he returns to his seat, after the
unsuccessful sortie, he will say mentally, ‘What a donkey I was to be
so awkward! By St. Antonio, if he comes again, I’ll smash him!’ But if
you keep lashing away at him immediately, he will probably treat you
with contempt, and will have no intercourse with your gay deluders for
the rest of the day. It is some time, perhaps, since he has taken up
his seat in the water, without ever having seen an animal like that
which you are so obliging as to tender him; all of a sudden come a
swarm of locusts, as it were, one after another over his nob, which
astonish and alarm him exceedingly. Thus, it is apparent that you do
not do justice to his sagacity, or instinct, or whatever you please to
call it, if you set to work in such an intrusive manner.”

The preceding hints on trout fishing may with some exceptions, be
adopted by the salmon and salmon peal fisher; before I proceed
however to offer a few observations on the mode of fishing for these
fish, a brief notice of the natural history of the trout may not be
unacceptable.

The common trout is an inhabitant of most of the rivers and lakes of
Great Britain. It is a voracious feeder and is vigilant, cautious, and
active. During the day, the larger sized fish move little from their
accustomed haunts, but towards evening and during the night, they rove
in search of small fish, insects, and their various larvæ, upon which
they feed with eagerness.

The young trout fry may be seen throughout the day, sporting in the
shallow gravelly scours of the stream, where the want of sufficient
depth of water, or the greater caution of larger and older fish prevent
their appearance. Though vigilant and cautious in the extreme, the
trout is also bold, and active. A pike and a trout put into a confined
place together, had several battles for a particular spot, but the
trout was eventually the master. This fish varies considerably in
appearance in different localities; so much so, as to induce a belief
that several species exist. Lord Home, however, who has paid much
attention to the subject, remarks, “I am much inclined to think there
is but one kind of river trout; the large lake trout may be different.”

Sir Wm. Jardine, in a paper on Salmonidæ, has described at considerable
length, the variations observable in the trout of some of the lakes of
Sutherlandshire. The fish in these lakes are reddish, dark, or silvery,
according to the clearness of the water.

Mr. Neil, in his tour, notices the black moss trout of Loch Knitching,
and Loch Katrine, is said to abound also with small black trout; an
effect considered to be produced in some waters by receiving the
drainage of boggy moors. In streams that flow rapidly over gravelly or
rocky bottoms, the trout are remarkable for the brilliancy and beauty
of their spots and colours. Thus, in our immediate neighbourhood, we
find that the trout caught between Shaugh Bridge and Plym Steps, on
the river Cad, are generally very dark, approaching in some instances
almost to a black; whilst on the Tavy, below Denham Bridge, they will
be found of a light silvery hue; so also on the Yealm--those taken
below Lee Mill Bridge, are of a bright sparkling appearance, whilst
others caught in Horns and Dendles, or on the moor above, are generally
very dark, and in some of the pools which seldom enjoy the rays of the
sun, are almost black.

The author of the “Wild Sports of the West of Ireland” remarks, “I
never observed the effect of bottom soil upon the quality of fish so
strongly marked as in the trout taken in a small lake, in the county of
Monaghan. The water is a long irregular sheet, of no great depth: one
shore bounded by a bog, the other, by a dry and gravelly surface. On
the bog side, the trout are of the dark and shapeless species peculiar
to moory loughs, while the other affords the beautiful and sprightly
variety, generally inhabiting rapid and sandy streams. Narrow as the
lake is, the fish appear to confine themselves to their respective
limits: the _red_ trout being never found upon the bog moiety of the
lake, nor the black where the under surface is hard gravel.”

Sir H. Davie gives the following account of their spawning; and his
remarks on some of the flies upon which they feed will be found
interesting.

“Trout spawn or deposit their ova and seminal fluid in the end of
Autumn or beginning of Winter, from the middle of November till the
beginning of January: this materially depending upon the temperature of
the season, their quantity of food, &c. For some time (a month or six
weeks) before they are prepared for the sexual functions, or that of
reproduction, they become less fat, particularly the females, the large
quantity of eggs and their size, probably affecting the health of the
animal, and compressing generally the vital organs in the abdomen. They
are at least six weeks or two months after they have spawned before
they recover their flesh, and the time when these fish are at the
worst, is likewise the worst time for fly fishing, both on account of
the cold weather and because there are fewer flies on the water than
at any other season. Even in December and January there are a few small
gnats, or water flies on the water in the middle of the day, in bright
days or when there is sunshine. These are generally black, and they
escape the influence of the frost, by the effects of light on their
black bodies--and probably, by the extreme rapidity of the motions of
their fluids, and generally of their organs. They are found _only_
on the surface of the water, where the temperature must be above the
freezing point.

“In February a few double winged water flies, which swim down the
stream, are usually found in the middle of the day--such as the willow
fly, and the cow-dung fly is sometimes carried on the water by winds.
In March there are several flies found on most rivers, and in April,
the blue and browns come on--the first in dark days--the second in
bright. These lay their eggs in the water, which produce larvæ that
remain in the state of worms, feeding and breathing in the water, till
they are prepared for their metamorphosis, and quit the bottoms of the
rivers, and the mud, and stone, for the surface, and the light and air.

“The brown fly usually disappears before the end of April--but of the
blue dun there is a succession of different tints, or species, or
varieties, which appear all the summer and autumn long. The excess of
heat seems equally unfavorable, as the excess of cold, to the existence
of the smaller species of water insect, which during the intensity of
sunshine seldom appear in summer, but rise morning and evening. Towards
the end of August the ephemera appear again in the middle of the day.
To attempt to describe all the variety that sport on the surface of
the water at different times of the day, throughout the year, would be
quite an endless labour. Some of them appear to live only a few hours,
none have their existence protracted to more than a few days. Of the
beetle, there are many varieties fed on by fishes.--These insects are
bred from eggs, which they deposit in the ground, or in the excrement
of animals. The cock-chafer, the fern fly, and gray beetle, are common
in our meadows in the summer, but there is hardly any insect that
flies, including the wasp, the hornet, the bee, and the butter-fly,
that does not become at sometime, the prey of fishes.”

Mr. Stoddart mentions an interesting experiment made with trout some
years ago, in the South of England, in order to ascertain the value
of different food. “Fish were placed in three separate tanks, one of
which was supplied daily with worms, another with live minnows, and
the third with those small dark coloured water flies, which are to be
found moving about on the surface, under banks, and sheltered places.
The trout fed with worms grew slowly, and had a lean appearance; those
nourished on minnows, which it was observed they darted at with great
avidity, became much larger; while, such as were fattened, upon flies
only, attained in a small time, prodigious dimensions, weighing twice
as much as both the others together, although the quantity of food
swallowed by them was in nowise so great.”

In the new Sporting Magazine for Nov., 1840, a writer on fishes says,
“An acutely-observing friend of mine, who has paid great attention to
the growth of trout, states that they are rarely visible the first
year, that they congregate with minnows and other small fry; the
second, are found on shallows; the third summer, about seven or eight
inches long; and subsequently increase rapidly to a pound or a pound
and a half, dependent on the quantity and quality of their food, the
season, and other circumstances.”

This gentleman has for years kept trout in a kind of store stream, and
having fed them with every kind of food, has had some of them increase
from one pound to ten pound in four years.

Steven Oliver, in his agreeable scenes and recollections of fly
fishing, mentions a trout taken in the neighbourhood of Great
Driffield, in September, 1832, which measured thirty-one inches in
length, twenty-one in girth, and weighed seventeen pounds.

A few years since, a notice was sent to the Linnæan Society, of a trout
that was caught on the 11th January, 1822, in a little stream, ten feet
wide, branching from the Avon, at the back of Castle-street, Salisbury.
On being taken out of the water, its weight was found to be twenty-five
pounds. Mrs. Powell, at the bottom of whose garden the fish was first
discovered, placed it in a pond, where it lived some time.

The age to which trout may arrive, has not been ascertained. Mr.
Oliver mentions that in August, 1809, a trout died which had been for
twenty-eight years an inhabitant of the well, in Dumbarton Castle.

A trout died in 1826, which had lived 53 years in a small well in
the orchard of Mr. William Mossop, of Board Hall, near Broughton, in
Furness.

The trout in our streams rarely exceed a pound in weight: this may, in
some degree, be accounted for from the circumstance, that the Devon and
Cornish rivers are very rapid, consequently, the insects which fall
from the bushes, are carried so swiftly down the stream, that whilst a
fish is engaged in seizing on one, the others pass rapidly by: the same
remarks may, in times of flood, apply to worms, &c. In more tranquil
rivers a fly seldom escapes; it lights, or is blown on the water, is
immediately espied, and the fish, whilst occupied in seizing one, has
half-a-dozen in his eye, each awaiting his leisure in calm repose. That
our trout _will_ increase rapidly, under favorable circumstances, I can
testify from my own experience. I knew several that were placed in a
pond, in August, which averaged from eight to ten ounces; in the July
following, I caught the same fish with a fly, which averaged from one
pound to one pound and a half.

Before taking leave of trout, I must notice a fly which may be used
with success after sunset, in the months of July and August. It is
called the white moth, and has often given me sport as late as ten and
eleven on fine moon-light nights. Choose an open place on a tranquil
portion of the river; the fly may be thrown with less nicety than in
the day-time, and catching a fish does not alarm the neighbouring fry,
who will frequently seize the moth immediately after the water has been
disturbed by the efforts of the captured fish to rid itself from the
hook.

Fly-fishing for salmon is seldom pursued in these counties. The fish
meets with such a host of formidable enemies as soon as it quits
the sea, that comparatively few ascend our rivers. The intent of
the proprietors of our fisheries appears to be the annihilation of
this prince of fishes. The most impracticable weirs are constructed,
over which it is almost impossible for a fish to leap; in the pools
immediately below, the rapacious fisherman casts his net every tide;
whilst above, if perchance a fish does succeed in evading the cunning
of his netting foes, a host of spearmen are on watch by night, as well
as by day, to immolate the persecuted wanderer.

Laws exist, restricting the capture of salmon, within certain months;
but that which in this case is truly everybody’s business, is
considered nobody’s; consequently, in season and out of season are they
caught, sold, and devoured, as openly as if no penalties were incurred
by the act. _That_ food, which under proper regulation would soon
become abundant and reasonable, can only now be placed on the tables of
the affluent.

The preservation of salmon I hold to be a question of national
importance; so much so, that I consider conservators should be
appointed to protect them, as well from the unlawful proceedings of
the owners of fisheries, as from the unscrupulous acts of the poacher.
Weirs should be so constructed as to admit of their ascending whenever
the waters are swollen by floods; hutches should be kept open at least
forty-eight hours during the week.

Besides the perils which await the parents on their journey _from_ the
sea, their young are also in imminent danger on their route towards the
sea. The millers take them in traps, by thousands, and dispose of them
by the gallon to the neighbours; indeed, at times they are taken in
such vast quantities that pigs are regaled upon their delicate flesh.

Man is not content with employing his own ingenuity in capturing
this delicious fish, he calls to his aid the sagacity of the dog,
which we find becomes, by practice, as expert a fisherman as his
master: numerous instances of this are on record. The following are
well-established facts:--In the work by the Reverend William Hamilton,
an interesting account is related of the assistance afforded by a
water-dog to some salmon fishermen, when working nets in shallow pools.
The dog takes his post in a ford where the water is not very deep,
and at a distance below the net; if a salmon escapes the net, the fish
makes a shoot down the river, in the direction towards the sea; the
dog watches, and marks his approach by the ripple on the water, and
endeavours to turn the fish back towards the net, or catch him; if he
fails in both attempts, the dog then quits the water, in which the
pace of the fish is too fast for him, and runs with all his speed down
the bank to intercept the fish at the next shallow ford, where another
opportunity, and a second diverting attempt, occurs.

Dogs are occasionally used in Glamorganshire, when trying for salmon.
They appear to take great pleasure in the pursuit, exhibiting by turns
the most patient watchfulness, persevering exertion, or extraordinary
sagacity, as either quality may best effect the wishes of the master.

In some parts of Wales, where the rivers are narrow, the salmon are
caught in a net drawn by men on each bank; dogs are trained to swim
over from side to side, with the head and ground lines of the net, as
required.

A clever poacher at Totnes, allows that he has killed many salmon in
the night, on the Dart, by setting a trammel net at the lower end of
the deep pools, by sending in a dog at the upper end of the pool, which
dog he had trained to dive like an otter. The fish, as soon as the dog
dived, immediately dashed down the stream, and were taken in the net at
the lower end of the pool.

The Earl of Home, in a letter to the Earl of Montague, dated 10th
January, 1837, relates the following history of a Newfoundland dog,
which belonged to his uncle. He knew the Monday mornings as well as
the fishermen themselves, and used to go to the mill dam at Fireburn
Mill, on these mornings. He there took his station, at the opening in
the dam, to allow the salmon to pass, and has been known to kill from
12 to 20 salmon in a morning: the fish he took to the side. The then
Lord Tankerville instituted a process against the dog. This case was
brought before the Court of Session, and the process was entitled, “The
Earl of Tankerville _versus_ a dog, the property of the Earl of Home.”
Judgment was given in favor of the dog.

Hoping the time may arrive, when the salmon in our rivers will afford
similar opportunities for the display of canine sagacity, I shall, in
anticipation of such good days, proceed to offer a few brief hints,
which our grand-children may find useful, when tempted by a strong
breeze and a dark gloomy sky, to cast the fly over a salmon run.

Follow the advice given with reference to the purchase of trout tackle;
go to the best, which you will find the cheapest market.

Let the manufacturer know the average width of the river, and he will
provide the rod, &c., accordingly.

In the selection of your flies, be guided by the suggestions of a local
fisherman--obtain patterns, and get them fac-similied by a well-reputed
maker, whose hooks are known to stand a long-contested struggle.

Commence fishing at the head of the pool Z., instead of at the tail, as
in trout fishing.

Throw the fly directly across the river, from where the fisherman
stands at A., to B. Let it sink a little below the surface; then guide
it from B. to G., forming the segment of a circle; give it, during this
passage, a jerking or sliding motion, such as water-spiders exhibit
when sporting on still pools by the side of rivers; at each jerk draw
the fly gently towards you, two feet or two and a half for salmon,
seven or ten inches for peal. For instance, your fly having lighted at
B., draw it to C., then pause a moment, when the stream will carry it
down to D. again; draw it to E., and let it fall back to F.; pursue the
same process until the curve from B. to G. is completed. By giving this
motion to the fly, it appears to be struggling against the stream. In
drawing it towards you the wings collapse, when you pause they expand.

[Illustration]

Having cast five or six times from B. to G., move on a few paces, and
throw over to H., forming a curve to I., and so on until the pool is
carefully tried.

If a fish has been moved, note the place, and try him again in a few
minutes. Be careful, not to throw immediately over the spot where he
rose; but let the fly approach him in one of the glides made in the
curve. Should the fish _then_ take the fly, don’t strike directly, but
allow a second or two to intervene, when you will find the fish well
hooked. Don’t be frightened--keep perfectly cool--hold your rod well
back, the butt end rather from you; indulge the fish with as much line
as he requires, taking care however to bear well and steadily against
him, so that he encounters much resistance in drawing the line over the
rod and off the reel. When the fish slackens his pace, reel up as much
of your line as you can do with safety; this economy may be most useful
when he again rushes off. The length of time occupied in playing the
salmon depends somewhat upon the nature of the adjacent banks, and also
upon the size and disposition of the fish, some being more lively than
others; and a small fish will frequently afford better sport than one
of twice or thrice its weight.

A gaff, or landing net, is necessary, as no gut will stand the strain
of lifting a large fish out of the water. The foregoing remarks will be
found applicable to peal fishing, which may be obtained in some of our
rivers, and is justly considered very excellent sport.

To enter more into the detail of this amusement is not my present
intention, I must be content with this rough sketch, leaving others to
complete the picture. It is proper however to remark, that the flies
used in peal fishing are about twice the size of those used for trout:
they should be purchased under the advice of an experienced fisherman,
as they differ materially from these which are applicable to the Irish
and other rivers.

The ingenuity of the sportsman has been taxed to vary the means of
capturing the salmon. Sometimes they are shot whilst leaping the weirs,
at others they are speared by torch lights from the banks of rivers, or
from boats. The otter has been trained to catch and bring the fish to
his master; and, in “Red Gauntlet,” we find a lively sketch of a salmon
chase, which is thus described by Darsie Latimer, in one of his letters
to Allan Fairford.

“The scene was animated by the exertions of a number of horsemen, who
were employed in hunting salmon. Aye, Alan, lift up your hands and eyes
as you will, I can give their mode of fishing no name so appropriate,
for they chased the fish at full gallop, and struck them with their
barbed spears, as you see hunters spearing boars in the old tapestry.
The salmon, to be sure, take the thing more quietly than the boars; but
they are so swift in their own element, that to pursue and strike them
is the task of a good horseman with a quick eye, a determined hand,
and a full command both of his horse and weapon. The shouts of the
fellows, as they galloped up and down in the animating exercise--their
loud bursts of laughter, when any of their number caught a fall--and
still louder acclamations, when any of the party made a capital stroke
with his lance--gave so much animation to the whole scene, that I
caught the enthusiasm of the sport, and ventured forward a considerable
space on the sands.”

In the Arms of the city of Glasgow, and in those of the see, a salmon,
with a ring in its mouth, is said to record a miracle of St. Kentigern,
the founder of the see, and the first Bishop of Glasgow.

“They report,” says Spotswood, “that a lady of good place, in the
country, having lost her ring in crossing the Clyde, and her husband
waxing jealous, as if she had bestowed the same on one of her lovers,
she did mean herself unto Kentigern; entreating his help for the safety
of her honour; and that he, going to the river after he had used his
devotions, willed one, who was making to fish, to bring him the first
fish that was caught, which was done. In the mouth of this fish, he
found the ring, and sending it to the lady, she was thereby freed of
her husband’s suspicion.”

The classical tale of Polycrates related by Herodotus, a thousand years
before the tale of St. Kentigern, is perhaps the earliest version of
the fish and the ring. “This ring,” says Herodotus, “was an emerald set
in gold, and beautifully engraved;” and this very ring Pliny relates,
was preserved in the Temple of Concord, in Rome, to which it was given
by the Emperor Augustus.

It is somewhat singular, that the Natural History of a fish, which
constitutes so important an article of commerce--that adds so much to
the wealth of a country where it abounds--that forms so nutricious and
delicate a food--that affords an amusement which rivals that truly
British sport of fox-hunting, should have remained for centuries in
considerable obscurity.

Of late, Jardine, Shaw, Scrope, and others, have investigated the
subject with much success; still, many points require further
elucidation, especially with reference to the causes which induce this
fish to quit its more congenial quarters, and resort to the fresh
water, which is evidently distasteful to them, as they decrease in
weight and become much weakened after they have frequented the rivers a
few months.

Some of the recent experiments, touching the young of the salmon, are
very curious, and exhibit much patient and minute enquiry.

Mr. Scrope, in his very interesting work entitled “Days and Nights
of Salmon Fishing,” observes, “This splendid fish leaves the sea and
comes up the Tweed at every period of the year, in greater or lesser
quantities, becoming more abundant in the river as the summer advances.
It travels rapidly, so that those salmon which leave the sea, and go
up the Tweed on the Saturday night, at twelve o’clock, (after which
time no nets are worked till the sabbath is passed) are found and
taken on the following Monday, near St. Boswell’s, a distance, as the
river winds, of about forty miles. When the strength of the current is
considered, and also the sinuous course a fish must take, in order to
avoid the strong rapids, this power of swimming is most extraordinary.”

As salmon are supposed to enter a river merely for the purpose of
spawning, and as that process does not take place till September, one
cannot well account for their appearing in some rivers so early as
February, and March, seeing that they lose in weight and condition
during their continuance in fresh water. Some suppose it is to get
rid of the sea louse, but this supposition must be set aside, when it
is known that this insect adheres only to a portion of the newly run
fish, which are in the best condition. I think it more probable they
are driven from the coasts near the river by the numerous enemies
they encounter there--such as porpoises, and seals, which devour them
in great quantities; however this may be, they remain in the fresh
water till the spawning months begin. In the cold months, they lie in
deep and easy water, and as the season advances, they draw into the
principal rough streams, always lying in places, where they can be
least easily discovered. They prefer lying upon even rock, or behind
large blocks of stone, particularly such as are of a colour similar
to themselves. At every rise of the river from floods, the fish move
upwards, nearer the spawning places, so that no one can reckon on
preserving his particular part of the river, which is the chief reason
of the universal destruction of those valuable animals. Previous to
a flood, the fish frequently leap out of the water, either for the
purpose of filling their air bladder, to make them more buoyant for
travelling; or from excitement; or perhaps to exercise their powers
of ascending heights and cataracts in the course of their journey
upwards. Mr. Yarrell places their power of leaping at ten or twelve
feet perpendicularly, but I do not think I ever saw one spring out of
the water above five or six feet. Large fish can spring much higher
than small ones; but their powers are limited or augmented, according
to the depth of water they spring from. They rise rapidly from the
bottom of the water to the surface, by means of rowing and sculling,
as it were, with their fins and tails; and this powerful impetus bears
them upwards in the air, on the same principle that a few tugs of the
oar make a boat shoot onwards, after one has ceased to row.

The fish pass every practicable obstruction till they arrive at the
spawning ground; some early, some late in the season. The principal
spawning months are December, January, and February; but in some rivers
the season is much earlier.

Salmon are led by instinct to select such places for depositing their
spawn, as are least likely to be effected by the floods. These are the
broad parts of the river, where the water runs swift and shallow, and
has a free passage over an even bed. Here they either select an old
spawning place, or form a fresh one, which is made by the _female_.
Some fancy, that the elongation of the lower jaw in the male, which is
somewhat in the form of a crook, is designed by nature to enable him
to excavate the spawning trough; certainly it is difficult to divine
what may be the use of this very ugly excrescence, but observation has
proved that this idea is a fallacy, and that the male _never_ assists
in making the spawning place. When the female first commences making
her spawning bed, she generally comes after sun set, and goes off in
the morning: she works up the gravel with her snout, her head pointing
against the stream, and she arranges the position of the loose gravel
with her tail. When this is done, the male makes his appearance in the
evenings, according to the usage of the female; he then remains close
by her, on the side on which the water is deepest. When the female
is in the act of emitting her ova, she turns upon her side, with her
face to the male, who never moves. The female runs her snout into the
gravel and forces herself under it as much as she possibly can, when
an attentive observer may see the red spawn coming from her. The male,
in his turn, lets his milt go over the spawn, and this process goes on
for some days, more or less, according to the size of the fish, and
consequent quantity of the eggs.

If a strange male interferes, the original one chases him with great
fury, and in their combats, frequently inflict great injury upon each
other. When the female has spawned, she sets off and leaves the place;
the male remains, waiting for another female, and if none comes in
twenty-four hours, he goes away in search of another spawning place.

When the spawning is finished, the fish become very lank and weak,
and fall into deep easy water. Here, after a time, their strength
is recruited, when as the spring advances, the strongest fish leave
the depths and draw into the streams. They now move down the river in
their passage to the sea. When they arrive in the deep pools, near the
mouths of the rivers, they take rest for a few days; here they may be
caught by anglers, as they take the fly and other baits freely. March
is usually the best month for this sport--if indeed, it can be called
sport, to kill an animal that is worth a mere trifle and resists but
little.

Having now dispatched the salmon to the sea, it remains to explain
what becomes of the spawn, and how, and when, the young fry arrive at
maturity; and as there have been various doubts and contradictions
on this subject, I think it more prudent to lead the reader to a
consideration of the following pages, than to make a positive assertion
on my own unsupported authority.

Up to a late period, it was universally thought that the spawn
deposited, as described above, was matured in a brief time, and that
the young fry of the winter grew to six or seven inches long; were
silver in colour; and went down to the sea in this state with the first
floods, early in the May of the coming spring.

Mr. Shaw’s ingenious experiments, which have been continued with the
greatest care and attention for a long period, disprove the correctness
of this opinion. This gentleman constructed three ponds, the banks so
raised, and otherwise formed in such a manner, that it was impossible
for any fish to escape, or for any other fish to have access to them.
On the 4th of January, 1837, some fresh spawn was deposited in one of
these ponds, on the 28th of April, one hundred and fourteen days after
impregnation, the young salmon were excluded from the egg. On the 24th
of May, twenty-seven days after being hatched, the young fish had
consumed the yolk which remains attached to the lower part of the body,
and which serves them for nourishment; the characteristic bars of the
parr had then become distinctly visible. From an unforeseen accident,
his experiments upon this brood were abruptly terminated. With a
second, however, he was more fortunate. On the 27th January, 1837,
he deposited some spawn in one of his ponds; on the 21st March, the
embryo fish were visible to the naked eye. From a minute inspection, he
found that they had some appearance of animation, from a very minute
streak of blood which appeared to traverse for a short distance the
interior of the egg, originating near two small dark spots, not larger
than the point of a pin. These two spots ultimately turned out to be
the eyes of the embryo fish. On the 7th May, (one hundred and one
days after impregnation) they had burst the envelope, and were found
among the shingle in the stream; at this period the head is larger in
proportion to the body, which is exceedingly small, and measures about
five-eighths of an inch in length; of a pale blue or peach blossom
colour. But the most singular part of the fish is the conical, bag
like appearance, which adheres by its base to the abdomen. This bag
is about two-eighths of an inch in length, of a beautiful transparent
red, very much resembling a light red currant. The body also presents
another singular appearance, namely, a fin or fringe, resembling that
of the tail of the tadpole, which runs from the dorsal and anal fins
to the termination of the tail, and is slightly indented. This little
fish does not leave the gravel immediately after its exclusion from the
egg, but remains for some time beneath it, with the bag attached, which
contains its supply of nourishment.

On the 24th June, Mr. Shaw found the bag had disappeared, but the
symmetry of the form was as yet but imperfect. At the end of two
months, (7th July) the shape was much improved. At the age of four
months (7th September) the characteristic marks of the parr or samlet
were partly developed. Two months later (six months old 7th November)
the average length was three inches. On the 10th May, 1838, the fish
being then twelve months old, were improved in condition, and measured
four inches: they had changed their winter coating for that which may
be called their summer dress. On the approach of autumn, the whole of
the salmonidæ, while resident in fresh water, acquire a dusky exterior,
accompanied by a considerable increase of mucus or slime. As the summer
advanced, they continued to increase in size; and on the 14th November,
being then eighteen months old, they measured six inches in length, and
had attained that stage, when all the external markings of the parr are
strikingly developed. On the 20th May, 1839, the fish being then two
years old, they measured six inches and a half long, and had assumed
the migratory state.

This change commenced about the middle of the previous April; the
caudal, pectoral, and dorsal fins assuming a dusky margin, while the
whole of the fish exhibited symptoms of a silvery exterior, as well as
an increased elegance of form.

The specimens in question, so recently a parr, exhibited a perfect
example of the salmon fry, or smolt. Mr. Shaw having thus traced the
spawn of the salmon up to this point, it will now be necessary to
pursue our inquiries until we find the matured fish. The descent of
these little fish takes place much about the same time in all rivers,
commencing in March, and continuing through April, and part of May.
They first keep in the slack water, by the side of the river; after a
time, as they become stronger, they go more towards the mid-stream;
and when the water is increased by rain, they move gradually down the
river. On meeting the tide, they remain for two or three days, in that
part where the water becomes a little brackish from the mixture of salt
water, till they are inured to the change, when they go off to the sea
all at once. There their growth is very rapid, and many return to the
brackish water, increased in size, in proportion to the time they
have been absent. Fry, which were marked in April and May, have been
caught on their return at the end of June, weighing from two to three
pounds in weight. These are sold in our markets as salmon peal, when of
a larger size they are called gilse. A second visit to the sea gives
these another increase, when they return to the rivers as salmon.

By the term “gilse,” is meant young salmon that have only been to the
sea once. It seems worthy of remark, that salmon are sometimes smaller
than gilse; but although such gilse have only been once at sea, yet
the period they have remained there, must have exceeded the two short
visits made by the _small_ salmon, and hence their superiority of size.

It has been a constantly received opinion, that all the young fish,
after their first visit to the sea, return to the rivers in which they
had been bred; numbers of marked fish have certainly been retaken in
their native rivers, but from the observations of Dr. Heysham, and Sir
William Jardine, it is evident, that if the fish happen to have roved
far from the estuary of their native rivers, they run at the proper
season, up any stream, even the first they encounter, the temperature
and condition of which are congenial to them.

The growth of salmon, from the state of salmon fry or smolt, to that
of salmon peal and gilse, has been shown to be very rapid, and the
increase of weight, during each subsequent year, is believed to be
equal, if not to exceed the weight gained within the first. That
this fish is a voracious feeder may be inferred from the degree of
perfection in the arrangement of the teeth; yet few, of the many
observers, who have examined the stomach, have been able to ascertain
the exact nature of that food which must constitute its principal
support.

Faber, in his “Natural History of the Fishes of Iceland,” remarks,
“The common salmon feeds on small fishes and various small marine
animals.” Dr. Fleming confirms this, when he states that their favorite
food in the sea is the sand eel.

In a Prize Essay, published in the transactions of the Highland
Society, Mr. Morrison says, “I have taken salmon within flood mark,
some of which had two, and others three, full-sized herrings in their
stomachs.”

Mr. George Dormer, of Stone Mills, in the parish of Bridport, put a
female salmon which measured twenty inches in length, into a small
well, which measured only five feet by two feet four inches, and there
was only fifteen inches depth of water. In this confined place she
remained twelve years, she would come to the top of the water and take
meat off a plate, and would devour a quarter of a pound of lean meat in
less time than a man could eat it. She would allow Mr. Dormer to take
her out of the water, and when put into it again, would immediately
take meat from his hands. Some time since, a little girl teased her by
presenting the finger and then withdrawing it, till at last she leaped
a considerable height above the water, and caught her by the said
finger, which made it bleed profusely. At one time a duck approached
the well, and put in its head to take a draught of the water, when
Mrs. Fish, seeing a trespasser on her premises, seized the intruder by
the bill, and a desperate struggle ensued, which at last ended in the
release of Mr. Drake from the grasp of Mrs. Fish, and no sooner freed,
than Mr. Drake flew off in the greatest consternation and affright;
since which time to this day, he has not been seen to approach the
well, and it is with great difficulty he can be brought within sight of
it.

Salmon differ materially, both in flavor and weight, according to the
localities in which they are taken: thus, the Irish salmon seldom
exceed ten or twelve pounds. At two great fisheries which I have
visited, namely, Ballina and Ballinahinch, nine pounds is their
average weight; whereas in Scotland, they run considerably larger. The
Dart salmon is very superior to that taken in the Tamar; and the Thames
is esteemed the best flavored in England.

The epicure considers, that to eat this fish in perfection, it should
be dressed immediately after it has quitted its native element; it then
boils quite solid, and the flakes are covered with a white substance
resembling curd.

At Galway, the salmon, when taken out of the traps, in which they
are caught in ascending from the river to Loch Corrib, are placed
in a reservoir, through which a small stream is constantly flowing;
they remain here, until a customer seeks a particular sized fish;
by experience, the keeper knows the weight of each to a quarter of
a pound, the required salmon is immediately gaffed, and may be seen
floating in parsley and butter, within five minutes after its decease.

The bridge which crosses the river in the centre of the town, is
frequently lined with persons watching the salmon, which are to be
seen three or four deep in the pools below, they look like waving
weeds, and remain in the same position for hours. Boats are moored
about one hundred feet above the bridge, from whence sportsmen catch an
occasional fish with a shrimp, impaled on a good sized hook; the tackle
being necessarily fine, in consequence of the clearness of the water,
some skill is required to secure the prey; the spectators from above,
enter with much glee into the sport; applauding the piscator, when by
patience and adroitness, he is successful, and are equally bountiful
in their raillery, when for lack of these necessary qualities the
fish escapes. I remember watching with great interest, the manœuvres
of one of these waiters upon providence. He had hooked an unusually
large fish, and played him admirably for some time; it appeared quite
exhausted, and allowed itself to be guided within a few feet of the
boat, the well directed gaff was ready for its deadly purpose; in
another second, the fish would quiver on the barb, when in a twinkling,
the promised prize darted off with renewed energy, and rushing down
the river, passed beneath the centre arch, and could be seen on the
other side, struggling against the stream and the steady line of his
opponent; the man holding in his right hand his trusty rod, slipped
with his left, the rope which kept his boat in her position, which
quickly followed in the fish’s wake, when as a last effort, the salmon
doubled upon its pursuer, and darted through the second arch from that
which the boat had just entered; the line came of course in contact
with the pier, the fish gave one desperate plunge, the next moment the
line floated lightly on the surface of the water. The man cast his rod
in anger on the bottom of his boat, looked daggers at the laughing
crowd above, and quitted the scene of his disappointment, to seek
better fortune elsewhere.

The capture of a large fish, is a fatiguing operation, and requires
the utmost skill and patience; one jerk--one diverted look--the least
slackening of the line--and your labor is lost. The following are a
few instances of well requited proficiency. Although I cannot hold out
much promise of similar good fortune in the present day, as salmon are
now rarely taken, even in nets of equal size, it may be satisfactory to
the aspirant to know, that the largest fish do not necessarily afford
the best sport; they are apt to turn sulky and will lay doggedly at the
bottom of a pool, endeavouring to cut the line, by grating it against
a rock, or other hard substance with the nose; when this occurs, throw
gravel or small stones over the spot, where the fish is thus engaged,
and it will try some other expedient.

In the Thames, on the 3rd October, 1812, Mr. G. Marshall, of Brewer
Street, London, caught and killed a salmon with a single gut, that
weighed twenty-one pounds, four ounces.

Sir H. Davy, used occasionally to visit the Tweed. Upon one occasion,
he killed a salmon, that weighed forty-two pounds.

Mr. Lascelles, in his letters on sporting, says, “The largest salmon I
ever knew taken with a fly in Scotland, weighed fifty-four pounds and a
half.”

Sir Hyde Parker killed one in Sweden, that weighed sixty pounds; and
the Earl of Home killed one in the Tweed, which weighed sixty-nine
pounds and three-quarters.

The season of 1835, was remarkable for large salmon. A notice appeared
in the papers of one that weighed fifty-five pounds. Mr. Mudie has
recorded one of sixty pounds. In a note in several editions of
Walton, one is mentioned that weighed seventy pounds. Pennant has
noticed one of seventy-four pounds. The largest I have heard of was
in the possession of Mr. Groves, the fishmonger, of Bond street, it
weighed eighty-three pounds. It is not recorded how the last four were
captured, but I conclude those mentioned by Walton, and Pennant, were
also taken with the fly.

Page ninety-eight warns me, that my observations have exceeded the
limit I originally assigned them; I trust however they have not been
written in vain, but that the hints on fly-fishing, will enable the
uninitiated to commence the sport, fortified with some practical
information, and that his prospect of success will be more cheering
than if he had depended on the assurance so readily given by the vendor
of tackle--that his flies are certain killers, and his rods perfection.

I have written for the purpose of aiding the young in the acquirement
of an art, which if pursued under proper restrictions, will be found
conducive to the health of the body and improvement of the mind.

Knowing that vice too frequently springs up where cheerful recreations
are forbidden, I hold it to be the duty of parents, to encourage the
innocent amusements of their children.

The boy, who has been too severely curbed by the injudicious father,
I have seen, in after life, a sullen, morose, deceitful man; his
pleasures have been sought by stealth; falsehood has been practised,
to evade the censure of those who should have encouraged his youthful
pastimes. Vice, perchance has been courted, because it lurks in
darkness and obscurity, beyond the reach of the parent’s eye, whose
unwise command has forbid the joyous pursuits so congenial to the
unclouded days of youth.

I have also written for the guidance of those of maturer age; who,
fatigued with the drudgery of business, or worn by the anxiety of a
profession, seek some recreation, which may recruit their strength and
invigorate their minds, rendering them more fitted for the wonted task,
and more capable of fulfilling the duties of their respective stations.

That these objects may be obtained, and that good sport may attend
the Devon and Cornish fishermen, is the sincere wish of their fellow
sportsman.


G. W. SOLTAU.

_Little Efford, near Plymouth, 1847._


E. NETTLETON, Printer to Her Majesty, Plymouth.


Transcriber’s Notes

Page 60--changed ‘cock-chaffer’ to ‘cock-chafer’.
Page 79--changed ‘spawing’ to ‘spawning’.
Page 99--changed ‘obsurity’ to ‘obscurity’.

From the Errata:

Page 9--_to_ apt, now reads _too_ apt to rely.
Page 15--_variest_, now reads _veriest_
Page 20--_aught_, now reads _naught_
Page 35--_lace_, now reads _Laced_
Page 99--_falshood_, now reads _falsehood_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Trout Flies of Devon and Cornwall, and
How and When to Use Them, by G. W. Soltau

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TROUT FLIES OF DEVON AND CORNWALL ***

***** This file should be named 58674-0.txt or 58674-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/6/7/58674/

Produced by F E H and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

